Hey guys, Greg here. Let's talk about a popular algorithm known as recursion.
Now to illustrate this idea, let's talk about the Fibonacci number problems.
So the Fibonacci numbers are a sequence generally starting at zero and one.
And then the next number is recursively defined as the sum of the previous two values.
So the next number would be zero plus one, which is one.
This would be one plus one, which is two, two plus one, which is three.
We'd get five, eight, thirteen, and so on.
That sequence is actually infinite. That can keep going.
So formally, you would define this with a function, saying something like F at zero is equal
to zero. That's one base case. F at one is equal to one. That's another base case.
But more generally, for any end that's bigger than one, we would have that F at n is equal to
the sum of the previous two, which is F at n minus one plus F at n minus two.
So this is the formal way of saying your base case, F at zero is zero.
You could think about this basically as an index here. F at zero is zero and F at one is one.
And then for any end that's bigger than one here, so for two, three, four, five,
six, and so on, you'd have that F at n is equal to F at n minus one plus F at n minus two.
And if you were to write a actual function out of this, we'll just use Python,
because it's basically pseudocode, we'd have to find F at some value of n here.
Well, you'd have your base cases. So if n is equal to zero, then the base case just says
we would return the value of zero. So otherwise, if n is equal to one, well, that's your other
base case. So in that case, you would want to just return one. But more generally, if it's not one
of the two base cases, if it's not one of these two, then it's actually recursive, which means
you'd have to call the function that you're using the function F within this function itself.
So basically, otherwise, we'd have to return the value of F at n minus one plus F at n minus two.
Okay, this is the recursive part right here. From within this function called F,
you were actually calling that same function F. That is what it means to be a recursive function.
You're calling yourself. Okay, so let's see an example of this. So basically, if you called
something like F at five, if you wanted to know what F at five is, well, it's going to set five
over here. Okay, well, it's not zero. It's not one. And so we would actually return the result
of F at n minus one plus F at n minus two. So what it would need is F at n minus one,
which is going to be F at four. And it's also going to need F at three. So that's F at five
minus two. And so the result of this is actually going to be the addition of these two calls.
Okay, but this is recursive. And so F at four here, well, that itself is going to actually need
F at three. And it's also going to need F at two. And this is still recursive here. So let me
just move it up a bit. F at three is going to need F at two. And it's also going to need F at one.
And F at two, well, that would need F at one. And it would need F at zero. F at two is going
to need F at one and F at zero. And let's just copy and paste this stuff here because F of three
over here, well, it's going to need the same stuff over here. So F at three over here also needs
all of that information. And so to work out this information here, well, at the bottom, we know that
these base cases are actually numbers. And so these are basically leaves in this tree here.
It's kind of like a recursive tree. And so the leaves are numbers. F at zero, that is a number.
And so that is zero. F at one, that is a number, which is one. And now we know that F at two is one
plus zero. And so we can replace F at two with its value of one. F at one, again, these are all
going to be replaced by ones. Those are ones. This one is also a one. And so is that. Okay, these
ones are going to be zeros. And you can see we're basically doing duplicate information here. We
already learned earlier that F at two was one, but we're going to replace it again over here with
this is going to be one. And this is going to be one. So the F at threes, they are all going to
be twos. So this is going to be a two. And this is also going to be a two. Now the F at four
will be replaced by three. So this is three. And finally, we know that F at five, that is going
to be a value of five. And you can actually see that over here, we already computed that earlier.
Now when a function is recursive, you'll often hear this term called a call stack. So it is a
stack because it literally is a stack data structure. This is why recursion comes after the stack
sections because it uses a recursive call stack. And by call, we mean that's basically short for
function call stack. So this is our function. And we can see we're calling it many times here.
These are calls of the function. And so when you're calling the function within the function itself,
it is recursive. And it's going to generate will be called a function call stack or sometimes
called a recursive call stack. So let's say we wanted to compute F at four here. Well, I'm
actually going to put that on the bottom because it's a call stack. We could think about it as
building up. So what the call stack would be for this, it's going to look like this. So the call
of F at four, that's again, why it's called call stack because for this function call of F at four,
well, it stores certain information. It basically says there's this local variable N, which is equal
to four because throughout this call of the function and has a value of four. And function calls
also have memory addresses. They basically have what we'd call a return address. It's just
going to be like some hex code. So 0x and then a bunch of information here. We'll just call it 0x123.
And so for simplicity, let me just kind of think about this as address A here. So what F at four
does, well, it says, okay, N is equal to four throughout this function call. And so the first
thing it needs to know is the value of this, which is going to be F at N minus one, which will be
F at three. So it immediately calls this function here. And that's why it generates the call stack.
So F at four, it first needs to know the information for F at three. And so now we're in a new call
of the function here throughout this call is N equal to three. And so here, it stores information
here, N is equal to three. And it also has an address to return to. I'll just write address B, for
example, here it's some hex code. Okay, so F at three, well, it would need to know F at two
plus F at one. And so the first thing it does is it's going to go over into F at two. So we'd build
this up again. So we'd say, okay, well, we'd have a spot for F at two. And so throughout here,
N is equal to two. And we'd store our return address. So we'll just call that address C, for example.
Okay, so over here, we'd be concerned with N is equal to two. And so F at two would need F at
one plus F at zero. So the first thing it needs is F at one. So it's going to go over here. And so
we have F at one over here. Okay, so F at one is very interesting because we store here that N is
equal to one. And we'd have a return address address of D. And what's interesting about F at one
here is that it is not going to kind of build up the stack here. It is at what we call a base case.
And recursive functions, they need some sort of base cases here. Because if you didn't have them,
they'd basically just call forever. They would just infinitely call the function and you would never
return. So here, we've hit a base case, which is F at one. And so here at this function call
level, we just return one return. What does that really mean? Okay, we return two where we came
from will we came from F at two. So we're basically telling, Hey, F at two, you called me, you called
F at one. Well, my value, I'm going to return that to you is the value of one. So basically, we would
go back to F at two here. And it would kind of remember here, it would say, okay, we called this guy
here, we called F at one. And so his value is actually equal to one. And so we'd also need to call
F at M minus two. So he would want to know what the value of F at zero is. Currently, it's just a
question mark. So we would go and get F at zero. And so F at zero in this context, we have N is equal
to zero. And again, you would have some address, but I'm going to stop writing it. It's going to be
some address. We'll call it E. And so again, F at zero is a base case. So he's not going to build
this up any further. And so he's going to return to F at two via this memory address here. So that's
why we need the memory address, because F at zero, we need to know where to return to. We return to
where we called it, which in this case is address C associated with F at two. So we return our value
of zero over to this memory address, or basically telling F at two here that its value of F at zero,
that function call has a value of zero. Okay, it now knows that F at one is one and F at zero is zero.
So it knows the value of both of these two calls. And so now F at two is able to return the value,
which is F at one plus F at zero. And its value is going to be one, which is the sum of those two
things. Okay, so F at two is one, it's going to return to the thing that called it, which is going
to be F at three, which is located at memory address B. So it basically says, okay, hey, F at three
here, well, your value of F at two, that is going to be a result of one, but then F at three also
needs to know the value of F at one. And so it's going to then put that on the call stack. So F at
one, I'm going to do this a little bit faster. And so it would basically return here that its value
is a base case, which is just going to be the value of one. So that's how we know that F at three is
two, we return this information back to where we called it. So F at four knows that its value of F at
three is a value of two, but F at four also needs to know the value of F at two. And so we kind of
build this call stack back up here, F at two, well, F at two is not a base case. And so it needs to
know the value of F at one, which is currently a question mark, F at zero, which is currently a
question mark. And so we could draw that for F at one here that's going to quickly kind of return
here and say that the value of F at one, that is a base case of one, F at zero, that would tell us
that has a value of zero. And again, F at two would basically return the sum of these two values
over two, this call here. And so it would tell it that F at two, this value is going to be just one.
So now F at four actually has the total value here of F at three plus F at two, which is going to
just be three. So F at four has a value of three. Okay, so that's the recursive call stack and the
fundamental idea of recursion. So just to really illustrate what would happen here, if you called
something like F at four, well, it's firstly going to do this before it even thinks about this
idea. So the placement of this actually has a huge effect on the way that the computer is going
to run this. It first is going to see F at n minus one before worrying about F at n minus two.
So F at four is actually first going to think about F at three. And then it's a recursive call.
So F at three thinks about it the same way. This guy needs to know what F at two is first. So he
goes and gets F at two. And F at two is going to first think about F at one. Now we hit a base
case. And so F at two can kind of remember that F at one has a value of one. Okay, F at two also
is going to need F at zero, which we'd return back and say that's a value of zero. F at two
would then basically return to F at three that it has a value of one. Now F at three can think about
F at one. And so F at one is going to be a base case of just one. Okay, F at three is now going to
return to F at four that it has a value of two. And then F at four would go through this stuff.
So it also go through F at two, which again is going to go through F at one. That's going to be one.
F at two would then need F at zero, which is going to be zero. It would then say to F at four
that it has a value of one. And then ultimately we'd have that F at four is actually going to be
a result of three. So what happens is you can see there's one thing at this level. There's two
things at this level for at this level. And if we picked a higher value here, this actually would
have had at most eight things here and then 16 and you basically get a doubling effect. So what's
basically happening here is that there is two to the zero things at this level, two to the one here,
two to the two here and two to three here and so on. So you're getting a doubling effect starting
at n and that's going to work itself all the way down to zero. So there's approximately n things or
n plus one things there. So basically in the bottom level, you're going to have roughly two to the
n things. So you can think about this as a time complexity of big O of two to the n due to the
doubling effect. So the doubling effect happens because at any F at n, you basically need to sprout
off into two different pieces here. So your two is coming up because you basically have two
different options here and the n is happening because you're basically starting at n and working
yourself all the way down to the base cases. Okay, so this would have a time complexity of big O of two
to the n and this base complexity is extremely interesting here and a very important lesson. Well,
remember we drew that recursive call stack. I'm not going to draw it again because it's a little
annoying, but basically you would have F at five stores information like the value of n and the
return address. So that stores information. So as F at four, three, two, one, and it goes all the
way down here. So basically you are storing in the call stack all of this information at the same
time. So if you're storing some variables and a return address for each of those things in the
call stack, basically there is O of n many things there because again, you're starting at n which
is equal to five and you're working yourself down to the bottom of one or maybe down to zero.
It's the space complexity of big O of n due to the recursive call stack taking up that space.
So whenever you have a recursive function that's kind of drawn out like this, it's going to be a
space complexity of the height of that recursive tree. Now you can actually use recursion for many
problems, although some of the most common ones you'll see is for linked lists because they are
recursive data structure. They're basically a node that points to another node that itself is
basically a recursion and eventually it has a base case, which at the end is that it points to null
or in Python it would be called none. So linked lists are recursive and so their algorithms might
be recursive. We also have trees. So trees are recursive data structure because they might look
something like this. We basically have nodes that are pointing to other nodes and again they would
have base cases. So the leaf nodes here, they would have left and right children of nothing. These
are going to be pointing to null, which again are base cases. So trees are very recursive and so are
graphs and you can actually solve many problems just in general using recursion. It's very versatile.
Okay, so let's do a little fun with recursion here. So one thing that's recursive is definitely
a linked list. It's a recursive data structure in nature. So we'll have one points over to two,
points over to three, points over to four, and we'd be given some head to this linked list
called h. And so what I want to do is print the nodes in reverse order. So I want to see four first
and then three then two then one. Now we still have to start at the beginning of the list. We'd
have to start here because that is what we're given. You could think about this as a recursive
call stack. So you'd start at one. Just don't print it yet and then you could call the next node
which is going to be two. Don't print that. Just go over to the next node of three and they go
over to four. And then when we go over to well, nothing, this is basically just null. That would be
our base case here if null basically just returned back over here and so you'd return back here
and you could now print this value. So you could print the value of four and then you could return
back here and then print your value of three. So three and then we'd print again, we'd print two
and get to our very beginning of the list. We would print one and here you would entirely
relieve the call stack and so then you would be done. Okay, so let's first talk about the
Fibonacci sequence. So this is defined as f of zero is equal to zero and you might see other
base cases but that's generally how it's set up. F1 is equal to one and more generally for any
end that's bigger than one, you would have that F at n is equal to F at n minus one plus F at n
minus two. So we would make a recursive function called F at n and so you'd write your base cases
almost always at the top. So if n is equal to zero, then you would return the value of zero.
Otherwise, if n is equal to one, then you would return the other base case, which is one
and then otherwise you'd return the recursive part, which is F at n minus one plus F at n minus
two. Again, just the sum of the previous two values. Okay, so you could test this out here,
we could call say F at five that is equal to five. One of your base cases maybe so F at zero is zero,
F at one is equal to one and if you were to call this with a big value of say F at 100,
well, you can basically just watch it spin and do nothing. It is going to just sit here and compute
and technically it would complete eventually, but this has a time complexity of big O of two to
the n. So that would mean roughly this is trying to do two to the 100, which is a massive number
here. In fact, if we stop that, we could just calculate that two, you would do it asterisk
asterisk two to the 100 that is equal to this massive number. It's trying to do approximately
that many operations that's going to complete eventually in theory, but it's just going to take
way too long. So this is not going to work for bigger numbers. We could stick at something like
say F at 12 that's going to be 144. Now again, because of the recursive call stack here,
this is going to have a space complexity of big O of n basically starting at n. It has to open
the call stack and get all the way down to the base case before I can start relieving information.
So this has a time of two to the n and a space of O of n. So whenever you're given a recursive
formula like this, definitely think about recursion and just in general, many problems can be thought
of as recursively. Definitely linked lists are recursive. And so we'll write our function that
basically just prints and refers. So we'll define this as refers. It takes the head of a linked list.
And before we write this, we would need a linked list to call the song. So let me just paste our
previous linked list from before. So this is our class to actually get a real linked list. You
could do something like this. So head of one points over to three to four to seven to nothing.
So if we print the head, we'll just see the value of one, but we have that linked list. And I think
it's actually a little better just to call this node, although it doesn't really matter. So our
base case would be if we don't have a node, so that would mean if we call this on null,
what that would mean, we got to the end of the list. And so we are ready just to return. If we
don't have a node, if our node is null, we don't have anything to print. So we just return. Okay,
if we don't get hit by this if statement, then we are a node. And so before printing ourselves,
we want to print over the next guy. And so here's the recursion. You would want to first reverse
on the node dot next. So before processing ourselves, we want to process the next guy until we hit a
base case, and then we can start printing. After we're back from this function call here, we did
all the stuff ahead of it. We're back here and we're ready to print ourselves. So we'll just print
the current node. And that's really all it is here. So if you call reverse on the head of our linked
list, and sorry, it's going to be a capital H there, you would get the nodes in reverse order.
Our list was 1347, but we're printing it in the order of 7431. Okay, now this would have a
time complexity of big of n where n is the number of nodes in the linked list. We have to go through
the list and then basically return all the way back. And the space complexity, well, that actually
also has an O of n space. You could actually picture this basically as the call stack. We start at
the head, but before printing him, we have to go here, then we have to go here, then here,
then once we hit our base case of nothing, then we can actually start printing. And so basically,
this whole call stack is open. And so that is also going to be a space of big of n because of the
recursive call stack. Okay, so I hope this was helpful guys. Drop a like if it was and have a great
day. Bye bye.
